[SYCL][Doc] Release Notes for Jul'24 release (#15138)
intel/llvm: sycl/ReleaseNotes.md

  of the plugin DLLs races against the release of static global variables
  (like the default context).
- Intel Graphic Compiler's Vector Compute backend does not support O0 code and
  often gets miscompiled, produces wrong answers and crashes. This issue directly
  affects ESIMD code at O0. As a temporary workaround, we have optimize ESIMD code
  even in O0 mode.
  [00749b1e8](https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/00749b1e8e3085acfdc63108f073a255842533e2)
- [new] Use of some SYCL math built-ins (like `abs` or `clz`) in a program where
  `sycl/ext/intel/esimd.hpp` header is included causes compilation errors.
  This will be fixed in the next release (intel/llvm#14793)
- [new] When using `sycl_ext_oneapi_matrix` extension it is important for some
  devices to use the sm version (Compute Capability) corresponding to the device
  that will run the program, i.e. use `-fsycl-targets=nvidia_gpu_sm_xx` during
  compilation. This particularly affects matrix operations using `half` data
  type. For more information on this issue consult with
  https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#wmma-restrictions

> commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/c30769b122d99eb4d05bcb78f15e593491fe31ae

Reviewer: Not clear to me what  the list of UR commits from here to the end of the notes for, a sentence or two of context before it would be useful.

# Release notes Jul'24

Release notes for commit range
[d2817d6d317db1](https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/d2817d6d317db1143bb227168e85c409d5ab7c82)
...
[ebb3b4a21b3b0e](https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436)

## TODO

> commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/9876e19f4ff387b35b0c98c7d62e5f50e6de187d

Author: @tovinkere, @KseniyaTikhomirova, could you please help me understand if this commit should be added into release notes and if so, which message should be used?

Author: Talked offline with Kseniya, the commit was dropped from release notes in 82e564153684b5597ce075032cbbc8b2218a2d3f

    [SYCL][XPTI] 'queue_id' metadata feature refactoring (#13070)
    bugfix?

> commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/29b4d855fa1a378e89182795e0d368304c40c3f6

Author: @mmoadeli, the patch didn't update any tests, so it is hard to understand if it had user-visible impact. Could you please help understand if we should add this to release notes and if so which message should be used?

Reviewer 2: It fixed `cmath_test.cpp` and `math_test.cpp` on Windows for CUDA. But this isn't a configuration available in CI at the moment so they weren't marked XFAIL.

This does have a user impact, I think a message like below would be suitable for the release notes:

> Fix using C++ math functions when targeting Nvidia on Windows

    [SYCL][CUDA] Enable support of msvc math functions for nvptx target. (#14007)

> commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/7a9d3b1e9483b69baa0b8c6f1097016efd52854c

Author: @Naghasan, I understand that this commit is some kind of performance improvement for passing kernel arguments on CUDA. Is my understanding correct? Do you have any suggestions about how we should word this in release notes?

Author: @Naghasan, I've added some description of this change in 82e564153684b5597ce075032cbbc8b2218a2d3f, but feedback is still welcome

    [SYCL][NVPTX] Do not decompose SYCL functor unless necessary (#14434)

> commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/38e663ecd37de513d8e31afdfdf245cf8c9d17f0

Author: @againull, I found that this patch helped to resolve some weird issue, but do you have any more meaningful insights into it in context of mentioning it in release notes?

Author: Decided to completely drop this one in 82e564153684b5597ce075032cbbc8b2218a2d3f. Let me know if there are objections to that

    [SYCL] Declare __devicelib_assert_read only when fallback assert is enabled (#13241)
    Is there any particular user-visible bug associated with this?

> commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/4b993a7b32f7743980bce646765a1b427b0996b6

Author: @againull, @mdtoguchi, could you please suggest a message that should be used to describe this change?

Author: Some wording was added in 82e564153684b5597ce075032cbbc8b2218a2d3f, but any feedback is still welcome

    Revert "[SYCL][Driver] Link with sycl libs at link step of clang-cl -fsycl (#12793)" (#13326)
    revert commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/seems to be a part of a previous release

commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/4b14d706d93891cdb5b0e6a8d4b0b027c1d54ab8
    [SYCL][DeviceSanitizer] Use -asan-constructor-kind=none to disable ctor/dtor (#13259)
    was the bug really user-visible?
commit https://github.com/intel/llvm/commit/2442ef047a4e9e9c135beed18a92029e1aad6cad
    [DeviceSanitizer] Disable handling no return calls (#14652)

>     // bugfix?

Author: @wenju-he, @zhaomaosu, could you please help understand if those commits should be mentioned in release notes?
Are they separate bugfixes, or should they be squashed into some other notes we have here for the device sanitizer?

Author: Removed both TODOs in c77b5d3a8c25b88c9fd20d881c49e46073765f85

+UR commit below

## New Features

### SYCL Compiler

> - Added `-fsycl-range-rounding` command line option which allows to
>   control range rounding feature. In comparison with previously available

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Added `-fsycl-range-rounding` command line option which allows the
  control of the range rounding feature. In comparison with the previously available
```

Reviewer 3: Or "allows control over the range rounding feature", come to think of it.

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

  `-fsycl-disable-range-rounding` command line option and
  `__SYCL_DISABLE_PARALLEL_FOR_RANGE_ROUNDING__` macro the new flag also allows

>   to _force_ range rounding which will complete disable generation of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  to _force_ range rounding which will completely disable the generation of
```

Author: Applied in 4dfea21f74ea84cd81abd20b140f02bb85bda622

  non-rounded kernels, thus improving binary size. intel/llvm#12715
- Added `-fsycl-exp-range-rounding` command line option that enables
  experimental range rounding mode in which range rounding is performed across
  all dimensions. intel/llvm#12690
- Added support for the so-called [new offloading model](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/design/OffloadDesign.md).

>   It can be enabled by `--offload-new-driver` command line option and provides
>   a better infrastructure for us. In the future we expect to leverage that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  It can be enabled by the `--offload-new-driver` command line option and provides
  an improved infrastructure. In the future we expect to leverage that
```

Author: Applied in 4dfea21f74ea84cd81abd20b140f02bb85bda622

>   infrastructure to improve link times by reducing amount of I/O used by the
>   compiler and amount of external processes that it spawns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  infrastructure to improve link times by reducing the amount of I/O used by the
  compiler and the amount of external processes that it spawns.
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

>   Foundation for this work has been performed in previous release time frame and

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

  the following list of PRs only includes those done within this release
  time frame. intel/llvm#14252 intel/llvm#13394 intel/llvm#13648 intel/llvm#13687
  intel/llvm#14001 intel/llvm#14006 intel/llvm#14101 intel/llvm#14151
  intel/llvm#14253 intel/llvm#14177 intel/llvm#13672 intel/llvm#13688
  intel/llvm#13579 intel/llvm#13869 intel/llvm#14102 intel/llvm#14541
  intel/llvm#14541 intel/llvm#13898 intel/llvm#14143
  allow us to improve link time by reducing amount of external processes and
  temporary files used by the compiler. **Do we need to list PRs here?** There
  were many of them and some of them were merged in scope of a previous release.

> - Added `-fsycl-fp64-conv-emu` command line option which allows to enable
>   partial (only conversion operations are supported) emulation of `double` data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Added `-fsycl-fp64-conv-emu` command line option which allows the enabling
  of partial (only conversion operations are supported) emulation of `double` data
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

- Added `-fsystem-debug` command line option to complement existing
  `-fno-system-debug`. intel/llvm#13256
- Improved wording of an error about implicit `this` capture in a kernel. intel/llvm#14100
- Improved `--save-temps` to work with `-fsycl-host-compiler`. intel/llvm#114751
- Improved error message about missing AMDGPU architecture when several values
  are passed into `-fsycl-targets`. intel/llvm#13078
- Reduced list of commands invoked to generate dependencies using `-MD` flag
  by one command. intel/llvm#13217
- Enhanced diagnostic emitted if CUDA target triple passed to `-fsycl-targets`
  is incorrect. intel/llvm#14673
- Reduced size of shadow memory used by address sanitizer to avoid running out
  of memory in multi-GPU environments. intel/llvm#13857
- Enhanced address sanitizer to be able to detect out-of-bounds access to
  local accessors. intel/llvm#13503
- Enhanced address sanitizer to detect incorrect uses of USM deallocation
  functions (like calling `sycl::free` on a pointer that was not allocated as
  a USM pointer). intel/llvm#12882

> - Enhanced `-fintelfpga` flag: when it is used together with `-fp-module=fast`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Enhanced `-fintelfpga` flag. When used together with `-fp-module=fast`
```

Author: Applied in 4dfea21f74ea84cd81abd20b140f02bb85bda622

- Updated [`sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images.asciidoc) extension implementation to support cubemap images. intel/llvm#12996
- Added ESIMD API for dynamic allocation of named barriers. intel/llvm#13826
- Updated [`sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images.asciidoc) extension implementation to support sampled image arrays. intel/llvm#14237
- Added implementation for whole graph update (`executable_command_graph::update`).
  intel/llvm#13220 intel/llvm#14379 intel/llvm#14236
- Added a warning about use of the deprecated `<CL/sycl.hpp>` header. intel/llvm#13569
- Made `local_accessor::get_pointer` and `local_accessor::get_multi_ptr` throw
  `invalid` exception if they are called on host. intel/llvm#13747
- Extended detection of nested `queue` operations to support shortcut methods. intel/llvm#13659
- Added overloads of various ESIMD APIs (`atomic_update`, `block_[load|store]`

>   and some other) which allow to omit some template arguments, thus simplifying

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  and some other) which allow the omission of some template arguments, thus simplifying
```

Author: Applied in 8b9264c7b212610675e3e16bdaf1d6af049c8cc1

  by default. This should improve usability when printing `float` values on
  devices that doesn't support `fp64` aspect by disabling `float` -> `double`
  promotion in `printf` arguments. intel/llvm#13055
- Added a diagnostic if `slm_init` ESIMD API is called more than once in
  a kernel. intel/llvm#12804
- Updated implementation of
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc)
  extension to return `unknown` enumerator on an unsupported HW. intel/llvm#14190
- Extended list of known Intel GPU architectures available through
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc)
  extension. intel/llvm#13520 intel/llvm#14582
- Extended mechanism to clear in-memory cache in heavy tests to also work on
  `opencl` backend. intel/llvm#14119
- Moved bit shift and rotate ESIMD functions out of `experimental` namespace.
  intel/llvm#13545

> - moved `rdtsc` ESIMD function out of `experimental` namespace. intel/llvm#13417

Author: Applied in e5c50203759a4c6c0ed6aa14674e20634f6dd09a

- Added check for template argument `N` of `media_block_load` ESIMD API. intel/llvm#13668
- Enhanced deprecation message for `sub_group::barrier` to indicate which API
  should be used instead. intel/llvm#13276
- Added deprecation messages for `image_max_array_size` and `opencl_c_version`
  device info queries. intel/llvm#13279
- Updated [`sycl_ext_intel_device_info`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/sycl_ext_intel_device_info.md)
  extension implementation to throw synchronious exception with
  `feature_not_supported` error code. intel/llvm#14788

> - Reduced startup overhead on `libsycl.so` loading by outlining SYCL JIT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Reduced startup overhead of `libsycl.so` by outlining SYCL JIT
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

- Added new overloads of `load_2d`, `store_2d` or `prefetch_2d` ESIMD APIs that
  accept compile-time properties. intel/llvm#13046
- Added support for `shift_group_left`, `shift_group_right`,
  `permute_group_by_xor` and `select_from_group` algorithms for non-uniform
  groups. intel/llvm#12705
- Removed Plugin Interface. That is a collection of internal libraries which
  implemented unified interface to various lower-level runtimes like OpenCL,
  Level Zero, etc. It is now completely replaced by
  [Unified Runtime](https://github.com/oneapi-src/unified-runtime/) and this
  removal should reduce amount and size of redistributable libraries.
- Enhanced ESIMD `slm_atomic_update` API to also support `fsub` and `fadd`
  operations. intel/llvm#13535
- Lifted some of the restrictions from ESIMD `block_store` API. intel/llvm#13150
- Improved implementation of `group_store` and `group_load` APIs with intent for
  it to have better performance in some cases. intel/llvm#13734 intel/llvm#13673
- Added support for graph update functionality. intel/llvm#12840
- Added support for external semaphores that can take value to bindless images

>   extension. intel/llvm#13860

Author: Applied in 08997d4314baab9d10f3b3bdc68b394ae49a40d6

  extension which introduces load, store and fill matrix operations with
  out-of-bounds checks. intel/llvm#11172
- Updated
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_group`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_graph.asciidoc)
  extension:
  - added new functionality to update arguments and ND-range sizes of kernel
    nodes within a graph. intel/llvm#12486
  - clarified `enable_profiling` property in `command_graph::finalize`
    intel/llvm#14067
  - clarified how graph edges are recorded in a graph with in-order queues.
    intel/llvm#12916
  - clarified how code within command-group functions is handled.
    intel/llvm#13699
  - clarified interaction between queue properties and graphs. intel/llvm#13681
  - added `enable_profiling` property. intel/llvm#13088
- Updated
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_bindless_images.asciidoc)
  extension:

>   - added support external semaphores that can take value. intel/llvm#13860

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - added support external semaphores that can take a value. intel/llvm#13860
```

Author: Applied in 08997d4314baab9d10f3b3bdc68b394ae49a40d6

>   - added support for copying `image_mem_handle` between devices via

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - added support for importing importing externally allocated buffers 
    and semaphores through Win32 NT handles, as well as DirectX 12
    resources and fences. intel/llvm#13860
  - added support for copying `image_mem_handle` between devices via
```

Author: Applied in 08997d4314baab9d10f3b3bdc68b394ae49a40d6

    `ext_oneapi_copy`. intel/llvm#12449
  - added `fetch_image` overload which accepts sampled image and coordinates.
    intel/llvm#12447
  - added type hint template argument to `fetch_cubemap` and `sample_cubemap`
    APIs. intel/llvm#13742

### SYCLcompat

- Added non-`const` `image2d_max` and `image3d_max` getters. intel/llvm#14138
- Introduced versioning scheme for the library. intel/llvm#14457
- Enhanced  masked shuffle functions `select_from_sub_group`,
  `shift_sub_group_left`, `shift_sub_group_right` and `permute_sub_group_by_xor`
  to support CUDA devices. intel/llvm#13363
- Restricted `memory_order` argument of `atomic_ref` passed to
  `experimental::nd_range_barrier` to match supported on a device.
  intel/llvm#12974 intel/llvm#13641

## Bug Fixes

### SYCL Compiler

> - Fixed that using `-fsycl-link-targets` flag would inadvertently trigger some

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where using `-fsycl-link-targets` flag would inadvertently trigger some
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

  additional device code linking steps. intel/llvm#13004
- Fixed a bug that when AOT-compiling for Intel GPUs the compiler would pass
  some PVC-specific flags even if target device is not a PVC. intel/llvm#13794
- Fixed a bug with incorrect file extensions being emitted in AOT compilation
  when `--save-temps` is used. intel/llvm#14214
- Made `-fsycl-add-default-spec-consts-image` available with `clang-cl`. intel/llvm#13168
- Fixed an issue where performing separate compilation and linking with
  `-fsycl-link` would result in "number of output files and targets should match
  in unbundling mode" error emitted by the compiler during link step. intel/llvm#13002
- Fixed a bug in address sanitizer which may lead to crashes when an application

>   is launched on OpenCL CPU device. intel/llvm#13262

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  is launched on the OpenCL CPU device. intel/llvm#13262
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

> - Fixed a bug where calling certain built-in math functions that accepts
>   pointers (like `fract`, `frexp`, `modf`, etc.) and passing pointer in the
>   generic address space there would not compile for AMD devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where calling certain built-in math functions that accept
  pointers (like `fract`, `frexp`, `modf`, etc.) and passing pointers in the
  generic address space would not compile for AMD devices.
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

  intel/llvm#13015 intel/llvm#13092 intel/llvm#13361 intel/llvm#13792
  intel/llvm#13546
- Fixed a bug where compiling a program that contains kernels with different
  `reqd_work_group_size` attributes attached to them using
  `-fsycl-device-code-split=none` would result in an exception being thrown at
  runtime about mismatching work-group size. intel/llvm#13523
- Fixed a bug where compiling a kernel that is annotated with
  `reqd_work_group_size` attribute that has less than 3 arguments for HIP
  target caused compiler to crash. intel/llvm#13600
- Fixed a bug with `shift_group_[right|left]`, `permute_by_xor` and
  `select_from_group` algorithms would return invalid values if used with
  `half` data type on AMD devices. intel/llvm#13016

### SYCL Library

> - Fixed a situation when querying
>   `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device` could result in exception
>   being thrown instead of empty vector being returned. intel/llvm#13968

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed a situation when querying
  `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device` could result in an exception
  being thrown instead of an empty vector being returned. intel/llvm#13968
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

- Fixed `esimd::atan` implementation under `-ffast-math` flag. intel/llvm#13186
- Fixed an issue that component devices were not considered to be a descendent
  from their composite devices when creating a queue. intel/llvm#13513
- Fixed an issue that querying for
  `ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device::composite_device` would *not*
  throw an exception if device is not a component device. intel/llvm#13868
- Fixed an issue that querying for composite devices may result in some devices
  returned twice. intel/llvm#14442
- Fixed a bug that querying for composite devices may result in an exception
  being thrown instead of an empty vector being returned. intel/llvm#13931
- Fixed a bug in copy-constructor of `config_2d_mem_access` ESIMD class which
  would lead to compilation errors. intel/llvm#13632
- Fixed an issue that use of `atomic_ref<T *>` would not be detected as a use
  of `atomic64` aspect leading to errors due to speculative compilation. intel/llvm#14052

> - Fixed `ctanh` and `cexp` returning incorrect value in some edge cases. intel/llvm#14329

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed `ctanh` and `cexp` returning incorrect values in some edge cases. intel/llvm#14329
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

- Fixed a bug where values passed to `-Xs` option through `build_options`
  property were not passed down to device compiler when using
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler.asciidoc)
  extension. intel/llvm#14522
- Fixed a bug in
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler.asciidoc)
  extension implementation

>   TODO: add description here. @cperkinsintel . intel/llvm#14490

Author: I see that it was a fix related to `include_files` property for which we still don't have a spec merged (#11985) and therefore I decided to completely omit this line for now.

- Fixed a bug where defining kernel as a named functor whilst using
  `-fno-sycl-unnamed-lambda` would lead to a compilation error about unnamed
  lambdas being unsupported. intel/lvm#14614

> - Fixed an issue on CUDA & AMDGPU backends where `multi_ptr` relational
>   operators taking `std::nullptr_t` would produce different result comparing
>   to standard C++ helpers like `std::less`. intel/llvm#13201

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed an issue on CUDA & AMDGPU backends where `multi_ptr` relational
  operators taking `std::nullptr_t` would produce different results to
  their corresponding standard C++ helpers like `std::less`. intel/llvm#13201
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

- Fixed a compilation issue with `-fpreview-breaking-changes` flag when
  `windows.h` is included caued by conflict with `min`/`max` macro. intel/llvm#14260
- Fixed strict alias violations in `sycl::vec<sycl::half, N>::operator[]`
  implementation that could lead to spurious errors. intel/llvm#13596
- Fixed a bug where a barrier submitted into a command queue with host tasks
  could ignore them, as well as a few bugs related to synchronization of host
  tasks with barriers. intel/llvm#13094 intel/llvm#13863 intel/llvm#13094
- Fixed a compilation issue occurring when `printf` is used on CUDA backend
  on Windows. intel/llvm#13784

>   TODO: was it really a compilation issue?

Author: Even though `TODO` comment was dropped in 79f92950babfc01f52e27ab8d4b7f8c0d3fedaa2, feedback is still welcome here

> - Fixed an issue where compiler could emit SPIR-V instructions for reversing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Fixed an issue where the compiler could emit SPIR-V instructions for reversing
```

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

  bits in a variable which are not supported by device compilers.
  intel/llvm#13810 intel/llvm#13044
- Fixed a bug where having a default-constructed `local_accessor` as an argument
  could lead to runtime errors reported about being unable to set kernel
  argument. The issue manifested itself on Windows and under `-O0` optimization
  level on Linux as well. intel/llvm#13382
- Fixed a hang when invalid values were passed into `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR`. intel/llvm#13367
- Fixed shuffles over non-uniform groups on CUDA backend. intel/llvm#13230
- Fixed an issue with persistent cache where under certain circumstances (like
  cache directory being located on a network drive on Windows) SYCL RT would
  fail to create necessary directories for the cache to work. intel/llvm#13019
- Fixed a bug where querying a kernel by name from a kernel bundle would crash
  a program. intel/llvm#13155

>   TODO: ask @cperkinsintel for feedback about the wording here.

Author: Even though `TODO` comment was dropped in 79f92950babfc01f52e27ab8d4b7f8c0d3fedaa2, feedback is still welcome here

  to match the extension specification, i.e. there must be exactly one argument
  of each property type in the `properties` that is not default constructible
  and at most one argument of each property type in the `properties` that is
  default constructible. intel/llvm#13676
- Fixed a bug where using `load_2d`, `store_2d` or `prefetch_2d` ESIMD
  functions would lead to a build program failure error emitted by device
  compiler. intel/llvm#13613
- Fixed a bug where querying free device memory of integrated Intel GPUs would
  return 0 instead of throwing an exception that the feature is not supported
  for that device. intel/llvm#13209
- Fixed a heap buffer overflow in `sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler_opencl`
  extension implementation. intel/llvm#13214 intel/llvm#13448
- Fixed intel/llvm#12473 about `sycl_ext_oneapi_graph` extension implementation
  ignoring access mode of accessors and thus creating unnecessary edges in a
  graph. intel/llvm#13011
- Fixed a bug where a command submission time would not be always recorded in
  profiling info when using `sycl_ext_oneapi_graph` extension. intel/llvm#14678
- Fixed a bug with graph recording where submitting a barrier using the same

>   queue for two different graphs would result in runtime error "Graph nodes

Author: Applied in 8b9264c7b212610675e3e16bdaf1d6af049c8cc1

  cannot depend on events from another graph". intel/llvm#14212
- Fixed intel/llvm#13066 where submitting a barrier into an empty in-order queue

>   whilst recording a graph results in runtime error "No event has been recorded

Author: Applied in 1fe2c554292d3a9d90f952c02ff4b8e3dfaab706

- Implemented [`sycl_ext_oneapi_private_alloca`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_private_alloca.asciidoc) extension. intel/llvm#12966 intel/llvm#13490 intel/llvm#13181
- Implemented
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_enqueue_functions.asciidoc)
  extension. intel/llvm#13512 intel/llvm#13924 intel/llvm#14743
- Added support for `get_backend_info` API into various SYCL classes (`platform`, `context`, etc.). intel/llvm#12906
- Implemented [`sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store.asciidoc).
  Please note that the implementation is naive and does not expose any special
  HW capabilities, it won't provide any performance benefit over how a group
  load/store could be done without this extension using simple `for` loop and

>   group barriers. intel/llvm#13043

Reviewer 6: Implementation uses optimized SPIR-V block/write operations for sub-group load/stores if the operation can be directly mapped onto a single block operation. In other cases, it defers to the naive implementation.

>   group barriers. intel/llvm#13043

Author: Updated the wording and merged the two lines in 4e126782cfa90333cccfa4519f488fa0db6c5a00

  Known limitations:
    - free function kernels are only supported if defined at file scope
    - `SYCL_EXTERNAL` has to be used alongside `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_FUNCTION_PROPERTY`
      to define free function kernel
    - compiler won't emit any diagnostics if some restrictions from the
      extension specification are violated
    - arguments of a free function kernels cannot be composite data types like
      structs or SYCL classes like `accessor`
    - using `-fsycl-dead-args-optimization` (ON by default) can lead to failures
    - `info::kernel::num_args` won't return the right result for free function
      kernels
- Added experimental ESIMD function `fma` which results in a guaranteed fused
  multiply-add operation performed. intel/llvm#13366
- Implemented revision 2 of
  [`sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort`](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc)
  extension. intel/llvm14399 intel/llvm#14185 intel/llvm#13942 intel/llvm#13908
  intel/llvm#14591

> ### SYCLcompat library

Author: @Alcpz, I've applied your feedback in cf3fb5e9e9be153e83c3e058e053012aa1b3a5f0, but for the sake of double-checking that you've seen them: there are a few more `syclcompat` sub-sections in other sections (like bug fixes, improvements, etc.)

> ### SYCLcompat library

Reviewer 7: Yes. Those were reviewed as well. Thanks for the ping, I've should've clarified.

- Added support for 2-byte and 4-byte `memset` operations. intel/llvm#13409
- Added `compare`, `compare_both`, `compare_mask` and their `unordered_*`
  counterparts. intel/llvm#12998
- Added APIs for performing arithmetic operations on 33-bit extended values. intel/llvm#13006
- Added APIs for performing bitwise operations on 33-bit extended values. intel/llvm#13727
- Added `device_count` and `get_device_id` utility APIs. intel/llvm#14013

> - Added experimental `launch` API overloads that accept sub-group size. intel/llvm#13767

Reviewer 7: These APIs (#13767) were introduced in a highly experimental state that has already been removed from syclcompat (thought that change didn't make it into this release). Is it reasonable to remove it from the changelog to avoid exposing this functionality? Sorry if it's a dumb question.

Author: We control what we want to "advertise" and if something is too unstable/unfinished to be mentioned we can for sure drop it, especially if we know that we decided to drop that. It is just because I'm not familiar with `syclcompat` I listed everything there was

Reviewer 7: I see. I was not entirely aware of what the process was. I'd suggest to remove it from the release notes then. Thanks!

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed in cf3fb5e9e9be153e83c3e058e053012aa1b3a5f0

- Added `wait` and `wait_and_throw` free functions. intel/llvm#13029
- Added vectorized comparison `extend_vcompare[2|4]` APIs. intel/llvm#14079
- Added vectorized math `extend_v*2` APIs. intel/llvm#13953
- Added vectorized math `extend_v*4` APIs. intel/llvm#14078
- Added bitfield manipulation APIs `bfe_safe` and `bfi_safe`. intel/llvm#14006
- Added dot-product accumulate APIs `dp4a`, `dp2a_lo` and `dp2a_hi`. intel/llvm#14032
- Added `wait_and_free` API. intel/llvm#14015
- Added `filter_device` and `list_devices` APIs. intel/llvm#14016
- Added `funnelshift_*` APIs. intel/llvm#13825
- Added `match_[any|all]_over_sub_group` APIs. intel/llvm#12973

> - Added API to manage kernel libraries loading/unloading. intel/llvm#13053 intel/llvm#13932

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Added APIs to manage kernel libraries loading/unloading. intel/llvm#13053 intel/llvm#13932
```

Author: Applied in cf3fb5e9e9be153e83c3e058e053012aa1b3a5f0

- Added `cmul_add` API. intel/llvm#12969

> - Added experimental APIs for maksed operations over sub-groups (`select`, `shift`, etc.). intel/llvm#12972

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Added experimental APIs for masked operations over sub-groups (`select`, `shift`, etc.). intel/llvm#12972
```

Author: Applied in 0f2ae1e6ad68a13389e93c3c5a8a4f86b5ea5ee9

- Added various helper APIs: a mechanism to extract arguments from a kernel and
  its kernel parameters; type casting helper for generic address -> queue
  pointer; a wrapper to provide better support for logical groups; an enum to
  list supported group types. intel/llvm#12970
- Added wrappers/support to math functions `clamp`, `isnan`, `cbrt`, `min`,
  `max`, `fmin_nan`, `fmax_nan`, `pow`, `relu`; wrappers are needed to support
  variety of combinations of argument types compared to `sycl::` counterparts
  of those functions. intel/llvm#13005

> - Added `SYCLCOMPT_CHECK_ERROR` macro which is an error handling utility for

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Added `SYCLCOMPAT_CHECK_ERROR` macro which is an error handling utility for
```

Author: Applied in cf3fb5e9e9be153e83c3e058e053012aa1b3a5f0

  expressions that throw exceptions.

> - Added `image1d_max`, `image2d_max` and `image3d_max` device info getters
>   and setters. intel/llvm#13973

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Added `image1d_max`, `image2d_max` and `image3d_max` `device_info` getters
  and setters. intel/llvm#13973
```

Author: Applied in cf3fb5e9e9be153e83c3e058e053012aa1b3a5f0

    [Driver][SYCL][NewOffload] Update option passing for packager and AOT (#14066)
commit c2cdfccf4aa90a6da35826c55815f680db3b3805
    [New offload driver][sycl-post-link] Move sycl-post-link target specific options generation to linker wrapper (#14101)
commit 934b46f2fff602bcbe7c99c13a1dd7ed6955ae4f
    [Driver][SYCL][NewOffload] Fix duplication of device targets (#14143)
commit 6ecce4fdab98b31a897af23444ca4d636af89862
    [New offload driver][Device lib] Add SYCL device library files for all targets (#14102)
commit f9fd95ec6c2aa4b77b0503ae1a7a82d6747df105
    [Driver][SYCL][NewOffloadModel] Incorporate -device settings for GPU (#14151)
commit 9691782beff5456c297063223ff831d54a8cd624
    [SYCL][NFC][New offload model][llvm-spirv] Refactor llvm-spirv options generation for enabling correct use under new offload model (#14253)
commit 3e474e050206e234759115a6442cdd5fb084d3f6
    [New offload model] Cleanup the way sycl-post-link options are generated (#14177)
commit fe2b47f08bee73be8bd978c71f3946852e94d790
    [SYCL][AOT][New offload model] Add AOT support in clang-linker-wrapper for Intel CPUs/GPUs (#14252)
commit 1c13e6f5e6bae9df42b483852c60631609422043

>     [SYCL][ClangLinkerWrapper] Unconditionally pass -properties to sycl-post-link (#14541)

Reviewer 8: @asudarsa, hello, can you please help to formulate in a few short sentences - similar to sentences above - what was done in these commits for New Offloading Model? Only for changes which our users should know / visible to our users.

Reviewer 9: Thanks for working on this Alexey and Dmitry. I will provide a short write-up before EOD today. Thanks

Reviewer 9: Hi @dm-vodopyanov 

Here is a snippet that tries t summarize all my changes above.

`
SYCL offloading is currently performed using the 'old' offloading model where driver creates a static toolchain and makes a sequence of predetermined calls to several clang/llvm tools. In the new offloading model, linking and post-linking of device code is performed inside a dedicated tool - 'clang-linker-wrapper'. New offloading model can be enabled using '--offload-new-driver' option. Following are code changes made in the current release towards adding the new offloading model support for SYCL Old offloading model is currently the default for SYCL offloading:

1. Add AOT support in clang-linker-wrapper for Intel CPUs/GPUs (#14252)
2. Fix up option passing from driver to clang-linker-wrapper for several tools that are called inside clang-linker-wrapper. (#13394, #13648, #13687, #14001, #14066, #14101, #14151, #14253, #14177, #14541) 
3. Add support for some user facing SYCL options in the driver for new offloading model (#13672, #13688)
4. Generate SYCL device library objects using new offload model (#13579, #13869, #14102)
`

Please let me know if any modifications needed.

Thanks

- Deprecated `this_kernel::get_root_group` in favor of
  `this_work_item::get_root_group`. intel/llvm#13304
- Relaxed diagnostic about using virtual functions in SYCL kernels: now it is
  only emitted if a call is perfomed using virtual call mechanism, but it is not
  emitted for non-virtual calls of virtual functions. See also
  KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs#565. intel/llvm#114051 intel/llvm#14141
- ESIMD API `inv` was extended to support `double` arguments. intel/llvm#13838
- Enhanced validation (via `static_assert` mechanism) of template arguments of
  ESIMD `rdregion` and `wrregion` APIs. intel/llvm#13158
- Aligned mutating swizzle operators with the SYCL 2020 specification by making
  it a `friend` instead of member function. intel/llvm#13012
- Aligned `vec` conversion operator to a scalar with the SYCL 2020 specification
  by making it a non-template. intel/llvm#14668
- Removed deprecation warnings from math built-ins that accept raw pointers to
  align with the SYCL 2020 spec changes. intel/llvm#13238 intel/llvm#13893
- Added support for 1- and 2-byte data types to ESIMD prefetch APIs.
  intel/llvm#13452
- Enabled `ext_intel_matrix` support for Intel GNR devices. intel/llvm#14436

> - Added support for 1x64x16 `bfloat16` matrices on PVC> intel/llvm#13391

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- Added support for 1x64x16 `bfloat16` matrices on PVC. intel/llvm#13391
```

  able to execute kernels and memory operations in parallel. intel/llvm#13051
- Expanded list of supported atomic memory fence scopes supported by HIP
  devices. intel/llvm#12872
- Added SYCL wrappers for more Intel Math Functions. SYCL wrappers are in
  `sycl::ext::intel::math::` namespace and provide nicer names that do not
  start with `__`. intel/llvm#13762
- Added initial support for bindless images on Intel GPUs (only DG2 and MTL).
  It is very limited in functionality that is supported and it only works if
  certain environment variables are set. Therefore, it is not yet ready for a
  wide adoption, but could be used for very early adoption. intel/llvm#13946
  intel/llvm#13753 intel/llvm#14493 intel/llvm#14266
- Introduced an optimization to graphs where linear graphs would require less
  amount of synchronization. This optimization is backend-specific and only
  performed in very limited amount of cases. intel/llvm#13088
- Implemented new `fetch_image` overload which accepts sampled image and
  coordinates. intel/llvm#12447
- Extended address sanitizer support to cover Intel GPU devices besides CPU

>   devices. intel/llvm#13450

Reviewer 11: The PR #13450 is to support device sanitizer on DG2 GPU device. We have supported CPU and PVC GPU devices before this PR. Looks like this description is not accurate.

Author: Thanks, applied in c77b5d3a8c25b88c9fd20d881c49e46073765f85

## Improvements

### SYCL Compiler

- Improved compilation flow around integration footer when no 3rd-party host
  compiler is used. New compilation flow creates less temporary files and
  therefore should result in a slightly faster compilation. intel/llvm#13607 intel/llvm#14402
- Added support for `truncf`, `sinpif`, `rsqrtf`, `exp10f`, `ceilf`,
  `copysignf`, `cospif`, `fmaxf` and `fminf` functions in SYCL kernels as part of
  [C-CXX-StandardLibrary](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/C-CXX-StandardLibrary.rst)
  extension. intel/llvm#14132 intel/llvm#13714
- Added support for more IMF functions as part of [C-CXX-StandardLibrary](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ebb3b4a21b3b0e977f44434781729df7de83e436/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/C-CXX-StandardLibrary.rst) extension. intel/llvm#13786
- Added `-fsystem-debug` command line option to complement existing
  `-fno-system-debug`. intel/llvm#13256
- Improved wording of an error about implicit `this` capture in a kernel. intel/llvm#14100

> - Improved `--save-temps` to work with `-fsycl-host-compiler`. intel/llvm#114751

Author: ```suggestion
- Improved `--save-temps` to work with `-fsycl-host-compiler`. intel/llvm#14751
```

Author: c77b5d3a8c25b88c9fd20d881c49e46073765f85
